---
title: "Driving Alone"
slug: driving-alone
tags: Life
date_published: 2024-05-30
date_updated: 2024-05-30
layout: post
---

One of the most underrated pleasures of life is the experience of driving alone. When life and work feel overwhelming, I crave for the escapism and solitude offered by driving my car all by myself for a few hours. When driving alone, I feel like I am the captain of the ship, the pilot of the aircraft, the commander of the spaceship - an intrepid lone ranger making a distant voyage to uncharted lands. Unlike the brave explorers of the last century, it is unlikely I will get lost for I have a network of satellites precisely tracking my position through my phone, and should that fail, a compass and an old road map of the US tucked away in my glovebox. 

Despite its battered appearance, the vehicle I'm piloting is in remarkably good condition. I have a hunch that this trip will go without a hitch like the dozens I've had in this car in the past. I have little to worry about here - the oil is new, the tyres feel grippy, and the tank is filled with a reassuring amount of 87 octane fuel should I find myself hours away from a gas station. I feel prepared for any situation which may come my way with an assortment of life support gear scattered throughout the car's interior, including but not limited to hand warmers, a knife, a flashlight which doubles as a USB powerbank, an emergency can of Red Bull, energy bars, and gallons of water in the trunk.

My journey goes through phases, the first being the takeoff phase of making a precisely choreographed series of lane changes to get on the highway which takes me in the direction of where I want to go. With my car generally pointing in the right direction, I start to relax. I put the windows down and jam out on the greatest hits of my music library while making the occasional lane change to stay out of the exit lane of the interstate. Once I'm well out of the Bay Area, the traffic thins, I start the cruise control and roll the windows back up. The car now feels sealed to the outside and I turn my attention inwards. My vintage Corolla's uber reliable engine purrs lazily while dutifully propelling me along. Mere inches afforded by the tyres separate me from the asphalt passing me below at 100km/hr. The road ahead is mostly smooth, but any imperfections are foreshadowed by a creak of the coil springs followed by the bump deadened by the tyres and the suspension working in tandem. I become aware of distinct sounds such as the drone of the occasional motorbike and the rattling of the hard-worn semi truck passing me by.

After an hour or so, I turn the music down to a whisper volume and truly feel in tune with the machine in my hands. My mind is engaged in the activity of driving, yet I feel loose enough to enjoy the natural beauty which inevitably comes up on the horizon when driving hundreds of miles in any direction in California. I feel like I can take my mind back in a sort of virtual time warp to experiences which I had when I was 20, or even 15 if I try hard enough. In that sense, driving alone takes me to the same mental states I've experienced with longer meditation sessions. At some points I feel small and insignificant on the thousands of miles of tarmac, much like like a boat on a moonless night in the middle of the Caspian sea, heavily reliant on my instruments to guide me where I need to go. I feel vulnerable too, knowing full well that a problem with my car could leave me stranded in the middle of nowhere. But above all, the destination merely feels incidental when the making the journey is really what the trip is all about for me.

Like  any spiritual experience, driving alone requires certain conditions to be enjoyable. Though everyone is different, it is unlikely that the bumper to bumper commute in a commuter corridor would be an absorbing experience for anyone. Over time, I've also learned what constitutes the ideal solo road trip experience for me. Purely based on my opinion:
* I should be looking forward to going to the destination
* The trip must be longer than at least two hours (or 100+ miles) but less than five hours which is when the fatigue of driving starts setting in for me
* I should be able to maintain an average speed between 90km/hr and 110km/hr. Any slower feels frustrating and when going faster the wind noise becomes unbearable in my car
* There should be no agenda to reach the destination at a particular time
* The drive should have varied scenery such as the cliff views on the way to Lake Tahoe or the brilliant coastline on CA HWY1. In some parts, even the flat farmlands have their own charms with the change in smells along the way.
* There should be options fo making detours to interesting places along the route.
* The drive need not start at sunset, but it should definitely be _during_ sunset, preferably around the time the music stops and introspection starts
* Windy roads are not much fun in my car and they tend to tire me out quickly, so I much prefer long stretches of interstate with low-medium levels of traffic