---
title: Research During Masters
slug: research-experience
date_published: 2020-05-12T12:52:57.000Z
tags: College
layout: post
---

The visions I had for grad school have not quite been realized during my time at UPenn. The Statement of Purpose I used for my Masters' admissions was filled with the experiences I had when working on projects on during undergrad. I emphasized, if admitted, my goal was to advance the state of art in robotics at UPenn's labs. To be clear, the feelings were genuine and based on whatever experiences I had in undergrad, I was ready to take a lighter course during my masters if it would mean more time at research. The thesis option at Penn was an attractive option - granting one with the chance to do original research for two full semesters with a 20% reduction in course load to boot!

However, as I mentioned in my previous posts, this wasn't really to be. I ended up taking time-consuming courses in my first and second semester which left little time to do research. That's not to say it was for a lack of trying - for I did reach out two a couple of labs located at Pennovation Works (a business incubator and massive robotics research facility under one roof) which I was interested in. I had some good introductory conversations with the passionate PhDs and postdocs at these labs, and this was followed by sitting on a few lab meetings. 

One of the more notable discussions I had was when a postdoc at one of these labs asked me how I would solve one of the open research problems she was working on. Perplexed by the question, I said that I wouldn't be able to answer without reading some papers and doing some background reading, After all I had only just gotten the idea to pursue research and it was unlikely I would even know where to begin till I got warmed up with the problem. That's where she told me I was doing it wrong. She repeated the question and asked me to try harder, saying that I should try to pursue solving the problem with whatever experiences I had in my previous projects. It was a moment of epiphany for me, because till then I had always thought research would require substantial background and theory before building off someone else's work. Just thinking that solving a difficult problem with whatever I knew was a valid research direction in itself was a new way of thinking for me. It reminded me of my first meeting of Prof. Mandar at the Acoustic Research Lab, NUS, where his first question was how I would pursue solving the problem of disruption tolerant communication using underwater networks. I left that meeting with the lab's postdoc feeling a lot more certain I had come to the right place. Unfortunately, a couple of weeks after that meeting, COVID-19 caused the college to shutdown for good. With the burden of courses and daily struggle with new the lifestyle due to COVID, research was no longer at the to of my priority list and it looked like it would have to wait indefinitely.

It wasn't long though. My summer internship ended up getting cancelled a few weeks before it was going to start, so to stay busy during the summer, I ended up taking a remote research project at a different lab from the ones I had approached earlier in the year. At first glance, the project looked good. It was about creating a autonomous system for UAVs to avoid midair collisions (think of a virtual air traffic control for quadcopters). I felt like I could leverage some of my previous work for new ideas. However, soon after I started, the cracks in my what I knew started to become apparent. The project involved using Model Predictive Control (MPC) and convex optimization for planning trajectories.I only knew about MPC in passing and convex optimization was a topic I couldn't hope to cover in time for doing anything new in a 12 week project. I would end up spending weeks on what I felt was a novel approach, only to find that the team of PhDs and tried it out without much luck long before. I began poking around the existing work and it troubled me that the current ideas would only work for a very specific configuration of robots, which as anyone working in robotics knows, is rarely something which can be applied to the real world. At some point, it was clear that the project wasn't a good fit for me, so I dropped out of the lab soon after.

So what is the message in this cautionary tale? I feel that without the requisite knowledge (through coursework), it is not feasible to pursue research projects which heavily lean on those concepts. It's not the same as merely being unaware of the background of the project, for it's a lot easier to get up to speed on a project than having to do a couple of graduate courses just to get a grip on the how the existing solution works. I also suggest prodding an existing research approach for weaknesses, as it's possible you have the insight in patching these